this must be the easiest place in the
world to get lost I'm in the great sea
of sand in the Eastern Sahara behind me
to the South wave upon wave of dunes
stretch for hundreds of miles it will be
hard to imagine a landscape with fewer
features to it and with temperatures
rising to 50 degrees centigrade during
the day getting lost here could be
lethal and yet this is the home of one
of the most remarkable animal travelers
an ant that regularly leaves its home in
these sands and sits out on the longest
overland journey made by any insect it's
called cat a glyphis and it comes out
during the middle of the day when other
insects die from heat exhaustion cata
cliff is searches for these casualties
when it's so hot the leaden it seeks
relief from the burning surface when it
can
at first it forages randomly over the
sand but when it finds its exhausted
prey astonishingly it returns in a dead
straight line to its nest
it's so hot in the desert that even cat
a glyphis has to get back as quickly as
possible to its nest if it's not to risk
death these foraging journeys are
equivalent in human terms to a trek of
40 miles over completely featureless
territory and yet the ants even if they
wander about in searching for their food
are able to return directly to their
nest how do they achieve that well have
a closer look at one leaving on one of
these journeys it keeps stopping and
making a turn stop and turn stop and
turn
[Music]
as it turns it looks up at the Sun
checking its position it moves on again
and checks the Sun and the pattern of
polarized light it can measure the
distance between stops and it always
takes a bearing on the Sun at every one
of them when it eventually finds food a
quick calculation and it knows exactly
the shortest way home
[Music]
if you can use a beacon that's with you
wherever you go like the Sun then of
course you're no longer restricted to
your familiar home ground you can
venture into unknown territory
you can go long distances to find new
feeding grounds great journeys
you